---
layout: post
title: SINOTE 20190509
date: 2019-05-09
---

[Can This Marriage Be Saved? Chinese-U.S. Integration Frays](https://www.wsj.com/articles/can-this-marriage-be-saved-chinese-u-s-integration-frays-11557414600) <br> *by Greg Ip, Yoko Kubota & Bob Davis, from wsj.com, 20190509*

> Whether talks ultimately yield a deal, the decadeslong integration of the two economies appears bound to go into reverse as mutual suspicion and geostrategic rivalry permeate political and personal relationships.
>
> ...
>
> How much further this decoupling goes depends critically on what sort of deal, if any, emerges from the current negotiations. A new Cold War of limited and tightly controlled interactions isn’t likely: China is simply too big and too globally integrated. Nonetheless, American and Chinese investors, businesses and scholars could find themselves increasingly operating in separate spheres pursuing separate strategies.
>
> Some of the early trends are apparent. Trade flows once driven by cost, quality and proximity to customers increasingly reflect political priorities, whether it is Chinese purchases of U.S. energy and agriculture or the location of manufacturing plants.

[As China Trade Talks Stall, Xi Faces a Dilemma: Fold? Or Double Down?](https://www.nytimes.com/2019/05/09/world/asia/xi-jinping-donald-trump.html) <br> *by Chris Buckley & Steven Lee Myers, from nytimes.com, 20190509*

> As Chinese and American officials try to reach a trade deal, Xi Jinping faces a painful, possibly damaging, choice: to try to protect his aura of indomitability or retreat after President Trump accused China of reneging on the terms of a draft agreement and threatened to raise tariffs.
>
> ...
>
> Mr. Xi is China’s most powerful leader in decades, and he guards his image as a visionary statesman guiding his country to greatness. But China’s relationship with the United State is its most important, and if ties between the countries are mismanaged, that could damage China’s economy and tarnish Mr. Xi’s authority.
>
> Trade talks that just last week seemed close to fruition have abruptly become a flash point in the rocky relationship. Mr. Xi now faces questions at home over whether he miscalculated Mr. Trump’s resolve, and domestic rumblings could grow if the United States forces Mr. Xi to make concessions or if the talks break down.

[Calls to harden the West’s defences against China suggest despair](https://www.economist.com/china/2019/05/11/calls-to-harden-the-wests-defences-against-china-suggest-despair) <br> *from economist.com, 20190509*

> Alas, many Americans and other Westerners who work on China policy have little confidence that Chinese reformers wield enough clout to be meaningfully succoured or harmed. Foreign business bosses and politicians believe that Mr Xi’s economic aide, Liu He, is a reformer who wants China’s markets to be more open. But they see few signs that Mr Liu, who is a deputy prime minister, has any mandate of his own to tackle vested interests opposed to reform. His power comes from representing Mr Xi.
>
> That helps explain why so many foreign governments and businesses quietly applaud an aggressive American approach that a short while ago would have appalled them. In the absence of internal pressure from reformers, they hope that Mr Trump and his team will secure substantive changes in the way China uses subsidies, local monopolies and the coercive transfer of foreign trade secrets to manage its economy. Many of Mr Trump’s tactics dismay them, and have at times humiliated Mr Liu, as China’s trade envoy. But seeking and empowering allies inside China has not worked.

[Tiananmen Square: China steps up curbs on activists for 30th anniversary](https://www.theguardian.com/world/2019/may/09/tiananmen-square-china-steps-up-curbs-on-activists-for-30th-anniversary) <br> *by Lily Kuo, from theguardian.com, 20190509*

> Every year in late May, Hu Jia is taken on a mandatory holiday to Qinhuangdao, a port city almost 200 miles from his home in Beijing. He is accompanied by police on walks in the park or by the sea and is always in view of a minder. Hu returns to the capital only after 4 June, the anniversary of the Chinese government’s crackdown on pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square.
>
> ...
>
> Hu is one of many Chinese campaigners who are placed under tight surveillance in the days leading up to and after each anniversary. Every year, Chinese authorities launch an extensive “stability maintenance” campaign in which activists, critics of the government and outspoken parents of those who died in the crackdown are “travelled” to locations outside of Beijing or placed under house arrest. Social media is scrubbed of terms and images referring to the protests. Internet users sometimes find that searches even for words such as “today” [are blocked](https://globalvoices.org/2019/04/17/chinas-censored-histories-commemorating-the-30th-anniversary-of-the-tiananmen-square-massacre/).
>
> ...
>
> But activists say there is little work left for authorities to do, as there are few people left to speak up about the day. Over the last six years China’s leader, Xi Jinping, has overseen a clampdown on almost all aspects of civil society, from rights lawyers to [university students lobbying for workers’ rights](https://edition.cnn.com/2019/05/01/asia/china-students-peking-university-intl/index.html).