---
layout: post
title: Xi’s China
date: 2019-03-06
---

[The Problem With Xi’s China Model](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2019-03-06/problem-xis-china-model) <br> *by Elizabeth C. Economy, from foreignaffairs.com, 20190306*

> … Xi has moved away from Deng’s consensus-based decision-making and consolidated institutional power in his own hands. He has driven the Chinese Communist Party (CCP) more deeply into Chinese political, social, and economic life, while constraining the influence of foreign ideas and economic competition. And he has abandoned Deng’s low-profile foreign policy in favor of one that is ambitious and expansive.
>
> And yet the mood in Beijing is far from victorious. As Xi begins his second five-year term as CCP general secretary and (soon) president, there are signs that the new model’s very successes are becoming liabilities. Too much party control is contributing to a stagnant economy and societal discontent, while too much ambition has cooled the initial ardor with which many in the international community greeted Xi’s vision of a new global order “with Chinese characteristics.”
>
> Xi has given few signals publicly that anything has gone awry: the [first speeches](https://america.cgtn.com/2018/12/31/full-text-2019-new-year-speech-by-president-xi-jinping) of his second term even suggest that he is doubling down on his current approach. Doing so will only exacerbate the challenges that are emerging. But fortunately, because most of the country’s current problems are of Xi’s own making, he still has both the time and the power to correct his course.

[Xi Jinping needs a trade deal just as much as Donald Trump does](https://www.ft.com/content/3cf778ca-3f68-11e9-9499-290979c9807a) <br> *by Raghuram Rajan, from ft.com, 20190306*

> Not only might the horizons of the leaders of the Chinese Communist party on matters of jobs and economic growth be just as short as those of democratic politicians, their choices may be more circumscribed. A democratic leader can blame a sequence of errors by previous administrations for the current parlous state of the stock market and the economy...
>
> By contrast, even though Mr Xi inherited an over-leveraged economy, he cannot blame his predecessors for the difficult hand he was dealt or for the current slowdown. They too were from the party, and if the party is fallible, does it not follow that people should have the right to vote for a different regime?
>
> ...
>
> Mr Xi’s tight control over policy also makes it hard to diffuse blame. He must defend his own departure from his predecessor Deng Xiaoping’s dictum that to prosper, China should hide its capabilities and bide its time. From his early days in power, Mr Xi asserted that “the Chinese nation has gone from standing up, to becoming rich, to becoming strong”. Some argue his actions have been tantamount to waving a red rag at the Americans, and are directly responsible for today’s trade imbroglio. To quell criticism that he has dragged China’s growth down by challenging the US geopolitically too soon, Mr Xi needs a positive resolution to the conflict.

[Diplomatic Outbursts Mar Xi's Plan to Raise China on the World Stage](https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2019-03-06/diplomatic-outbursts-mar-xi-s-plan-to-raise-china-on-world-stage) <br> *by Bloomberg News, from bloomberg.com, 20190306*

> China’s diplomats aren’t being very diplomatic.
>
> In the past few months, its envoy to Canada publicly accused his hosts of “white supremacy,” its ambassador in Sweden labeled the Swedish police “inhumane” and blasted the country’s “so-called freedom of expression,” and its chief emissary in South Africa said President Donald Trump’s policies were making the U.S. “the enemy of the whole world.”
>
> ...
>
> At stake is China’s avowed goal of establishing itself as a global superpower with influence over a network of allies to balance U.S. influence. China is pouring billions into global efforts such as Xi’s Belt and Road Initiative to forge stronger links with countries around the world.
>
> But China’s increasingly strident diplomatic approach could do more harm than good. Anti-China sentiment has played a pivotal role in election surprises across Asia, and more countries around the world are becoming skeptical of Chinese investment -- particularly in telecommunications, with fears growing about using its equipment in 5G networks due to concerns about espionage.

[China’s Communist Party is battening down the hatches as the economy slows](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/chinas-communist-party-is-battening-down-the-hatches-as-the-economy-slows/2019/03/05/22516e98-3f1f-11e9-a44b-42f4df262a4c_story.html) <br> *by Anna Fifield, from washingtonpost.com, 20190305*

> The setting for the Chinese Communist Party’s annual confabs this year, when the party will celebrate the 70th anniversary of the foundation of the People’s Republic, could hardly have been more inauspicious.
>
> The economy is slowing palpably. A trade war with the United States is rumbling on. And there are persistent whispers about President Xi Jinping’s handling of both. Even the air was a foul-tasting soup of gray as the National People’s Congress opened Tuesday.
>
> “Looking out the next 12 months, Beijing sees the possibility of a significant deterioration in the economy,” said Jude Blanchette, head of the China practice at the Crumpton Group, a business intelligence firm. “There’s an increasing consensus in the private sector that Xi is mismanaging the economy, which has sparked an uptick in discontent over his leadership.” 

[Get Ready for China’s Baby Quotas](https://foreignpolicy.com/2019/03/05/beijing-wants-babies-xi-jinping-natalism-china/) <br> *by Frankie Huang, from foreignpolicy.com, 20190305*

> China has some of the least restrictive abortion laws in the world, but that has nothing to do with state support for bodily autonomy—it’s because abortion coincided with the government’s desires. Female bodies have always been treated as state property that yielded what the country needed. After over three decades of merciless enforcement of the one-child policy through fines, forced abortions, and forced sterilizations, the incoming demographic crisis is pushing things in a new, but equally intrusive, direction.
>
> ...
>
> The tension between what Chinese women want and what the state wants for them will only grow as the Chinese birthrate continues dropping, and women who withhold their fertility from their country will face repercussions. The party will push for women to accept timely motherhood as their only choice rather than one out of many, and this is why they are likely to face punishment (as extra births were punished under the one-child policy) rather than generous incentives to have children.
>
> ...
>
> Once, the party called upon women to throw themselves into the labor force, to settle for having just one child regardless of how many they wanted. Today, Chinese women’s newly updated destiny is to alleviate China’s shrinking labor force and aging population with their wombs.