---
layout: post
title: SINOTE 20190503
date: 2019-05-03
---

[May Fourth For the World](https://chinachannel.org/2019/05/03/global-may-4/) <br> *by Shakhar Rahav, from chinachannel.org, 20190503*

> On 4 May 1919 approximately 3000 students from over a dozen institutions took to the streets of Beijing to protest news that the Paris peace conference was rejecting Chinese demands to force Japan to cede control over territories it held in Shandong Province. The term “May Fourth” or “May Fourth Movement” has become an icon in Chinese history, and has come to denote that demonstration and those that followed, including a general strike that paralyzed Shanghai that June. The term is also routinely used in a broader chronological sense: to invoke the entire period of cultural and political unrest that lasted from 1915 until 1923. In both cases Beijing and Shanghai are usually the focus of attention.  My argument here, though, is that just as it May Fourth’s significance lies in the events of more than one or two months, it also involves more than just one or two places. A broader geographical as well as temporal perspective is needed. 
>
> In his seminal 1940 essay “On New Democracy,” Mao Zedong proclaimed, “since the May Fourth Movement things have been different.” Indeed, throughout the century since the 1919 demonstrations historians and many Chinese have treated May Fourth and the New Culture Movement associated with it as a watershed in the history of Modern China. For Mao the movement’s primary significance lay in paving the road to Communism, but the significance of May Fourth has always been contested. Historians and politicians have assigned it a variety of meanings, from cultural renaissance to patriotic awakening, from the advent of Marxism to the celebration of liberalism. Yet, history never stands still and each generation writes about May Fourth in ways that reflect the concerns of the era. The current moment provides many reasons to reassess May Fourth and ask new questions that reflect our concerns. What, for example, does May Fourth mean given what we now know about the evolution of Communism in China—the alternate paths of Taiwan and Hong-Kong, the embracing of market mechanisms in Deng Xiaoping’s time, and the “New Era” of Xi Jinping? What does language and cultural reform mean in the current era of globalization, and the digital revolution?  In our increasingly connected world, might we think of May Fourth as not just a local and national but also an *international* movement?

[The Chinese Enlightenment at 100](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/china/2019-05-03/chinese-enlightenment-100) <br> *by Dan Xin Huang, from foreignaffairs.com, 20190503*

> If the visionaries of New Culture readied the kindling, the students on May 4, 1919, lit the fire. The movement secured its place in Chinese history by consolidating diffuse ideals for the future under the [unifying banner of nationalism](https://www.foreignaffairs.com/articles/world/2019-02-12/why-nationalism-works): “How,” they asked,“might China rise again?” Some pressed for greater political freedoms. Others attacked the country’s Confucian heritage. Still others believed they were joining the fight against imperialism. For China’s vocal liberal wing, calls for “Mr. Science” and “Mr. Democracy” emerged as a rallying cry, becoming for many synonymous with the movement itself. At its heart, May Fourth succeeded because it stoked the same deep yearning in everyone—the wish to save China.
>
> Out of the movement’s bonfire leapt one ember that would catch and ignite into its own great flame. Taking inspiration from the Russian Revolution, China’s early Marxists began as a fringe study group on the campus of Peking University, steadily disseminating the language of class struggle and revolution to a national audience. In July 1921, around a dozen Marxists gathered for a secret meeting in Shanghai. Buoyed by support from the Soviet Comintern, they formally established the Communist Party in China and presided over its first party congress. Among the delegates was a local cell leader named Mao Zedong. May Fourth had catalyzed a turn in Mao’s worldview: sensing the need for a more structured politics, he abandoned his previous anarchism and plunged into Marxist­-Leninist theory. It was, he later reflected, “a critical period of my life.”

[China seeks to quell debate ahead of May 4](https://www.ft.com/content/be27446c-6c80-11e9-a9a5-351eeaef6d84) <br> *by Don Weinland, from ft.com, 20190503*

> The May Fourth movement started in 1919 as a protest against foreign powers and the weak Chinese government, but the anti-imperialist, democratic and nationalist ideals expressed by the students who took to the streets a century ago are credited by China’s Communist party with having lit the revolutionary flame that led to its formation.
>
> Its anniversary — which was preceded this year by the hastily announced [additional days](https://www.ft.com/content/3c84554e-5b2d-11e9-9dde-7aedca0a081a)of official holiday that analysts said were to ensure there would be no untoward gatherings — is followed by the even more sensitive 30th anniversary of the June 4 military suppression of student and worker protests on Tiananmen Square. During the weeks of demonstrations that preceded the massacre in 1989, students commemorated the May 4 anniversary, creating a direct link between the two.
>
> That problem for Beijing has not gone away. Marxist students across China who have called for better rights for workers generally view themselves as a youthful embodiment of the May Fourth spirit. Yet they fear harassment, even arrest, should they commemorate the day on their own.

['Stand together': support surges in China for student accusing JD.com tycoon of rape](https://www.theguardian.com/us-news/2019/may/03/china-richard-liu-rape-civil-lawsuit-support-surges-for-student) <br> *by Simina Mistreanu, from theguardian.com, 20190503*

> China’s internet users have rallied behind a student who is pursuing a civil case against billionaire retail tycoon Richard Liu, who she accuses of rape.
>
> Twenty-one-year-old University of Minnesota student Liu Jingyao, who has agreed to be named, has accused the JD.com chief executive of getting her drunk at a dinner and later raping her in her apartment in the US. The company – which is China’s second-largest e-commerce site and has been included in the suit – has dismissed the claim as [“meritless”](https://www.scmp.com/tech/e-commerce/article/3006515/jdcom-describes-lawsuit-meritless-after-minnesota-student-accuses)and said it would defend itself vigourously. 
>
> ...
>
> The fresh lawsuit against Liu, who is said to be worth $7.5bn by Forbes, was filed in Minnesota and has sparked an outpouring of support, with two hashtags on Weibo gathering more than 15m views within days: #HereForJingyao and #IAmNotAPerfectVictimEither (#woyebushiwanmeishouhaizhe).

[Beijing’s one-child policy is gone. But many Chinese are still reluctant to have more.](https://www.washingtonpost.com/world/asia_pacific/beijings-one-child-policy-is-gone-but-many-chinese-are-still-reluctant-to-have-more/2019/05/02/c722e568-604f-11e9-bf24-db4b9fb62aa2_story.html) <br> *by Anna Fifield, from washingtonpost.com, 20190503*

> Where they were once told it was a couple’s patriotic duty to have only one child, now good Chinese people should have at least two.
>
> “To put it frankly, giving birth is not only a family matter but also a national issue,” read a commentary last year in the People’s Daily, the newspaper of the ruling Communist Party. “Not wanting to have kids is just a lifestyle of passively giving in to society’s pressures.” 
>
> But it turns out that government policies have little influence on procreation in modern China. 
>
> ...
>
> It all comes down to the economy.
>
> As China has transformed, living costs have skyrocketed, especially in the big cities, and long work hours have become the norm. The 20-somethings of today, knowing their quality of life is better than their parents’ generation, want their children to experience a similar leap in living standards.